# BOOK TWO:

## Chapter 5: Ourselves

WE MUST not rely too much upon ourselves, for grace and understanding are often lacking in us. We have but little i nborn light, and this we quickly lose through negligence. Often we are not aware that we  are so blind in heart. Meanwhile we do wrong, and then do worse in excusing it. At times we are moved by passion, and we think it zeal. We take others to task for small mistakes, a nd overlook greater ones in ourselves. We are quick enough to feel and brood over the things we suffer from others, but we think nothing of how much others su ffer from us. If a man would weigh his own deeds fully and rightly, he would find little ca use to pass severe judgment on others.
The interior man puts the care of himself before all other concerns, and he who attends to himself carefully does not find it  hard to hold his tongue about others. You will never be devout of heart unless you are thus silent about the affairs of others and pay particular attention to yoursel f. If you attend wholly to God and yourself, you will be little disturbed by what you see about you.
Where are your thoughts when they are not upon yourself ? And after attending to various things, what have you gained if you have neglected self? If you wish to have true peace of mind and unity of purpose, you must cast all else aside and keep only yourself before your eyes.
You will make great progress if you keep your self free from all temporal cares, for to value anything that is temporal is a gr eat mistake. Consider nothing great, nothing high, nothing pleasing, nothing a cceptable, except God Himself or that which is of God.
Consider the consolations of creatures as va nity, for the soul that loves God scorns all things that are inferior to Him. God alone, the eternal and infi nite, satisfies all, bringing comfort to the soul an d true joy to the body.
