# BOOK THREE: 

## Chapter 21: Above All Goods And All Gifts We Must Rest In God

THE DISCIPLE  
 
ABOVE all things and in all things, O my s oul, rest always in God, for He is the everlasting rest of the saints. 
Grant, most sweet and loving Jesus, that  I may seek my repose in You above every creature; above all hea lth and beauty; above every honor and glory; every power and dignity; above all knowledge and clever ness, all riches and arts, all joy and gladness; above all fame and praise, all sweetness and consolation; above every hope and promise, every merit and desire; above all the gifts and favors that You can give or pour down upon me; above all the joy and exulta tion that the mind can receive and feel; and finally, above the angels and archangels and all the heavenly host; above all things visible and invisible; and may I seek my repo se in You above everything that is not You, my God. 
For You, O Lord my God, are above all things the best. You alone are most high, You alone most powerful. You alone are most sufficient and most satisfying, You alone most sweet and consoling. You alone are most beautiful and loving, You alone most noble and glorious above all things. In You is every perfection that has been or ever will be. Therefore, whatever You give me besi des Yourself, whatever You reveal to me concerning Yourself, and whatever You prom ise, is too small and insufficient when I do not see and fully enjoy You alone. For my h eart cannot rest or be fully content until, rising above all gifts and every creat ed thing, it rests in You. 
Who, O most beloved Spouse, Jesus Ch rist, most pure Lover, Lord of all creation, who shall give me the wings of true liberty that I may fly to rest in You? When shall freedom be fully given me to see how sweet You are, O Lord, my God? When shall I recollect myself entirely in You, so  that because of Your love I may feel, not

myself, but You alone above all sense and m easure, in a manner known to none? But now I often lament and grieve over my unhappine ss, for many evils befall me in this vale of miseries, often disturbing me, ma king me sad and overshadowing me, often hindering and distracting me, alluring and en tangling me so that  I neither have free access to You nor enjoy the sw eet embraces which are ever ready for blessed souls. 
Let my sighs and the manifold deso lation here on earth move You. 
O Jesus, Splendor of eternal  glory, Consolation of the pilgrim soul, with You my lips utter no sound and to You my silence speaks. How long will my Lord delay His coming? Let Him come to His poor servant and make him happy. Let Him put forth His hand and take this miserable creature from his anguish. Come, O come, for without You there will be no happy day or hour, because Y ou are my happiness and without You my table is empty. I am wretc hed, as it were imprisoned an d weighted down with fetters, until You fill me with the light of Your presenc e, restore me to liberty, and show me a friendly countenance. Let others seek instea d of You whatever they will, but nothing pleases me or will please me but You, my G od, my Hope, my everlasting Salvation. I will not be silent, I will not cease praying until Your grace returns to me and You speak inwardly to me, saying: "Behold, I am here.  Lo, I have come to you because you have called Me. Your tears and the des ire of your soul, your humility and contrition of heart have inclined Me and brought Me to you." 
Lord, I have called You, and have desired You, and have been ready to spurn all things for Your sake. For Y ou first spurred me on to seek  You. May You be blessed, therefore, O Lord, fo r having shown this goodness to Your servant according to the multitude of Your mercies. 
What more is there for Your servant to  say to You unless, with his iniquity and vileness always in mind, he humbles hi mself before You? Nothing among all the wonders of heaven and earth is like to You. Your works are exceedingly good, Your judgments true, and Your providence rules t he whole universe. May You be praised and glorified, therefore, O Wis dom of the Father. Let my lip s and my soul and all created things unite to praise and bless You.
