# BOOK TWO:

## Chapter 12: The Royal Road Of The Holy Cross

TO MANY the saying, "Deny thysel f, take up thy cross and follow Me,"19 seems hard, but it will be much  harder to hear that final word: "Depart from Me, ye cursed, into everlasting fire."20 Those who hear the word of the cross and follow it  willingly now, need not fear that they  will hear of eternal damnation on the day of judgment. This sign of the cross will be in the heavens when the Lor d comes to judge. Then all the servants of the cross, who during life made themselves one with the Cr ucified, will draw near with great trust to Christ, the judge.
Why, then, do you fear to take up t he cross when through it you can win a kingdom? In the cross is salvatio n, in the cross is life, in the cross is protection from enemies, in the cross is infusion of heavenly sweetness, in the cross is strength of mind, in the cross is joy of spirit, in the cross is highest virtue, in the cros s is perfect holiness.
There is no salvation of soul nor hope of  everlasting life but in the cross.
Take up your cross, therefore, and follo w Jesus, and you shall enter eternal life.
He Himself opened the way before you in ca rrying His cross, and upon it He died for you, that you, too, might ta ke up your cross and long to die upon it. If you die with Him, you shall also live with Him, and if you shar e His suffering, you shall also share His glory.
Behold, in the cross is everything, and upon your dying on the cross everything depends. There is no other way to life and to tr ue inward peace than the way of the holy cross and daily mortification. Go where you will, seek what you will, you will not find a higher way, nor a less exalted but safer way,  than the way of the holy cross. Arrange and order everything to suit  your will and judgment, and st ill you will find that some suffering must always be borne, willingly or unw illingly, and thus you will always find the cross.
Either you will experience bodily pain or yo u will undergo tribulation of spirit in your soul. At times you will be forsaken by  God, at times troubled by those about you and, what is worse, you wil l often grow weary of your self. You cannot escape, you cannot be relieved by any remedy or comfort but must bear with it as long as God wills.
For He wishes you to learn to bear trial without consolation, to submit yourself wholly to Him that you may become more humble through suffering. No one understands the passion of Christ so thoroughly or heartily as the man whose lot it is to suffer the like himself.

18Ps. 24:16.
19Matt. 16:24.
20Matt. 25:41.

The cross, therefore, is always ready; it awaits you everywhere. No matter where you may go, you cannot escape it, for wherev er you go you take yourself with you and shall always find yourself. Turn where y ou will -- above, below, without, or within -- you will find a cross in everything, and everywhere you must have patience if you would have peace within and meri t an eternal crown.
If you carry the cross willingly,  it will carry and lead yo u to the desired goal where indeed there shall be no more suffering, but here there shall be. If you carry it unwillingly, you create a burden fo r yourself and increase the load, though still you have to bear it. If you cast away one cross, you will find another and perhaps a heavier one.
Do you expect to escape what no mortal m an can ever avoid? Which of the saints was without a cross or trial on this earth? Not even Jesus Christ, our Lord, Whose every hour on earth knew the pain of His passion. " It behooveth Christ to suffer, and to rise again from the dead, . . . and so enter into his glory."
21 How is it that you look for another way than this, the roya l way of the holy cross?
The whole life of Christ was a cross and a martyrdom, and do you seek rest and enjoyment for yourself? You deceive yoursel f, you are mistaken if you seek anything but to suffer, for this mortal life is full of miseries and marked with crosses on all sides.
Indeed, the more spiritual progress a pers on makes, so much heavier will he frequently find the cross, because as his love increas es, the pain of his exile also increases.
Yet such a man, though afflicted in many ways, is not without hope of consolation, because he knows that great reward  is coming to him for bearing his cross.
And when he carries it willingly, every pang of tribulation is changed into hope of solace from God. Besides, the more t he flesh is distressed by affliction, so much the more is the spirit strengthened by inward grace. Not infrequently a man is so strengthened by his love of trials and hardship in his desire to conform to the cros s of Christ, that he does not wish to be without sorrow or pai n, since he believes he will be the more acceptable to God if he is able to endure more  and more grievous things for His sake.
It is the grace of Christ, and not the vi rtue of man, which can and does bring it about that through fervor of spir it frail flesh learns to love  and to gain what it naturally hates and shuns.
To carry the cross, to love the cross,  to chastise the body and bring it to subjection, to flee honors, to endure contempt  gladly, to despise self and wish to be despised, to suffer any adversity and loss, to  desire no prosperous days on earth -- this is not man's way. If you rely upon yoursel f, you can do none of these things, but if you trust in the Lord, strength  will be given you from heaven and the world and the flesh will be made subject to your word. You will not ev en fear your enemy, t he devil, if you are armed with faith and signed with the cross of Christ.
Set yourself, then, like a good and faithful servant of Ch rist, to bear bravely the cross of your Lord, Who out of love was cr ucified for you. Be ready to suffer many adversities and many kinds of trouble in this miserable life, for troublesome and miserable life will always be, no matter where you are; and so you will find it wherever you may hide. Thus it must be; and there is no way to ev ade the trials and sorrows of life but to bear them.

21Luke 24:46, 26.

Drink the chalice of the Lord with affect ion it you wish to be His friend and to have part with Him. Leave consolati on to God; let Him do as most pleases Him. On your part, be ready to bear sufferings and consider them the greatest consolation, for even though you alone were to undergo them all, the su fferings of this life are not worthy to be compared with the glory to come.
When you shall have come to the point wh ere suffering is sweet and acceptable for the sake of Christ, then consider yourse lf fortunate, for you have found paradise on earth. But as long as suffering irks you and you seek to escape, so long will you be unfortunate, and the tri bulation you seek to evade will fo llow you everywhere. If you put your mind to the things you ought to consider , that is, to sufferi ng and death, you would soon be in a better state and would find peace.
Although you were taken to the third heaven with Paul, you were not thereby insured against suffering. Jesus said: "I will show him how great things he must suffer for My name's sake."22 To suffer, then, remains your lot,  if you mean to love Jesus and serve Him forever.
If you were but worthy to suffer someth ing for the name of Jesus, what great glory would be in store for you, what great joy to all the saints of God, what great edification to those about you! For all m en praise patience though there are few who wish to practice it.
With good reason, then, ought you to be willi ng to suffer a little for Christ since many suffer much more for the world.
Realize that you must lead a dying life; t he more a man dies to  himself, the more he begins to live unto God.
No man is fit to enjoy heaven unless he has resigned himself to suffer hardship for Christ. Nothing is more acceptable to God,  nothing more helpful for you on this earth than to suffer willingly for Christ. If you had to make a choice, you ought to wish rather to suffer for Christ than to enjoy many c onsolations, for thus you would be more like Christ and more like all the saints. Our merit and progress consist not in many pleasures and comforts but rather in enduring great afflictions and sufferings.
If, indeed, there were anything better or more useful for man's salvation than suffering, Christ would have shown it by word and example. But He clearly exhorts the disciples who follow Him and all who wish to fo llow Him to carry the cross, saying: "If any man will come after Me, let him deny hims elf, and take up his cross daily, and follow Me."23 When, therefore, we have read and searched  all that has been written, let this be the final conclusion -- that through much su ffering we must enter  into the kingdom of God.


22Acts 9:16.
23Luke 9:23.
