# BOOK ONE: 

## Chapter 20: The Love Of Solitude And Silence

SEEK a suitable time for leisure and meditate often on the favors of God. Leave curiosities alone. Read such matters as br ing sorrow to the heart rather than occupation to the mind. If you withdraw yourself fr om unnecessary talking and idle running about, from listening to gossip and rumors, you will fi nd enough time that is suitable for holy meditation. 
Very many great saints avoided the co mpany of men wherever possible and chose to serve God in retirement. "As often as I have been among men," said one writer, "I have returned less a man." We often find this to be true when we take part in long conversations. It is easier to be silent altogether than not to speak too much. To stay at home is easier than to be suffici ently on guard while away. Anyone, then, who aims to live the inner and spiritual life mu st go apart, with Jesus,  from the crowd. 
No man appears in safety before the public eye unless he first relishes obscurity. 
No man is safe in speaking unless he loves to be silent. No man rules safely unless he is willing to be ruled. No man commands sa fely unless he has learned well how to obey. 
No man rejoices safely unless he has wit hin him the testimony of a good conscience. 
More than this, the security of the saints was always enveloped in the fear of God, nor were they less cautious and humbl e because they were conspicuous for great virtues and graces. The security of the wick ed, on the contrary, springs from pride and presumption, and will end in  their own deception. 
Never promise yourself security in this  life, even though you seem to be a good religious, or a devout hermit. It happens very often that those whom  men esteem highly are more seriously endangered by their own exce ssive confidence. Hence, for many it is better not to be too free from temptations, but often to be tried lest they become too secure, too filled with pride, or even t oo eager to fall back upon external comforts. 
If only a man would never seek passing joys or entangle himself with worldly affairs, what a good conscience he would have. What great peace and tranquillity would be his, if he cut himself off from all empty care and thought only of things divine, things helpful to his soul, and put all his trust in God. 
No man deserves the consolation of heaven unless he persistently arouses himself to holy contrition. If you desire true so rrow of heart, seek the privacy of your cell and shut out the uproar of the worl d, as it is written: "In y our chamber bewail your sins." 
There you will find what t oo often you lose abroad. 
                                                 
4Luke 12:43, 44.

Your cell will become dear to you if you remain in it, but if you do not, it will become wearisome. If in the beginning of your religious life,  you live within your cell and keep to it, it will soon become a special friend and a very great comfort. 
In silence and quiet the devout soul adv ances in virtue and learns the hidden truths of Scripture. There she finds a fl ood of tears with which to bathe and cleanse herself nightly, that she may become the more  intimate with her Creator the farther she withdraws from all the tumult of the world. For God and His holy angels will draw near to him who withdraws from friends and acquaintances. 
It is better for a man to be obscure and to at tend to his salvation than to neglect it and work miracles. It is prai seworthy for a religious seld om to go abroad, to flee the sight of men and have no wish to see them. 
Why wish to see what you are not permitted to have? "The world passes away and the concupiscence thereof."  Sensual craving sometime s entices you to wander around, but when the moment is  past, what do you bring back with you save a disturbed conscience and heavy heart? A happy going o ften leads to a sad return, a merry evening to a mournful dawn. Thus, all car nal joy begins sweetly but in the end brings remorse and death. 
What can you find elsewher e that you cannot find her e in your cell? Behold heaven and earth and all the elem ents, for of these all thi ngs are made. What can you see anywhere under the sun that will remain long? Perhaps you think you will completely satisfy yourself, but you cannot  do so, for if you should see all existing things, what would they be but an empty vision? 
Raise your eyes to God in heaven and pray because of your sins and shortcomings. Leave vanity to the vain. Se t yourself to the things which God has commanded you to do. Close the door upon yourself and call to you Jesus, your Beloved. Remain with Him in your cell, for no where else will you find such peace. If you had not left it, and had not listened to idle gossip, you would have remained in greater peace. But since you love, sometimes, to hear  news, it is only right that you should suffer sorrow of heart from it.
