# BOOK THREE: 

## Chapter 34: God Is Sweet Above All Things And In All Things To Those Who Love

THE DISCIPLE  
 
BEHOLD, my God and my all! What more  do I wish for; what greater happiness can I desire? O sweet and delicious word! But sweet only to him who loves it, and not to the world or the things that are in the world. 
My God and my all! These words are enough for him who understands, and for him who loves it is a joy to repeat them ofte n. For when You are present, all things are delightful; when You are absent, all things become loathsome. It is You Who give a heart tranquillity, great peace and festive joy. It is You Who make us think well of all things, and praise You in all things. Without You nothing can give pleasure for very long, for if it is to be pleasing and tasteful, Your grace and the seasoning of Your wisdom must be in it. What is there that can disp lease him whose happiness is in You? And, on the contrary, what can satisfy him whose delight is not in You? 
The wise men of the world, the men who lu st for the flesh, are wanting in Your wisdom, because in the world is found the utmo st vanity, and in the flesh is death. But they who follow You by disdaining worldly th ings and mortifying the flesh are known to be truly wise, for they are transpor ted from vanity to truth, from  flesh to spirit. By such as these God is relished, and whatever good is found in  creatures they turn  to praise of the Creator. But great -- yes, very great, indeed -- is the difference between delight in the Creator and in the creature, in eternity and in  time, in Light uncreated and in the light that is reflected. 
O Light eternal, surpassing all created brightness, flas h forth the lightning from above and enlighten the inmost recesses of my heart. Cleanse, cheer, enlighten, and vivify my spirit with all its powers, that it may cleave to You in ecstasies of joy. Oh, when will that happy and wished-for hour  come, that You may fill me with Your presence and become all in all to me? So long as this is  not given me, my joy will not be complete. 
The old man, alas, yet lives within me. He  has not yet been entirely crucified; he is not yet entirely dead. He still lusts str ongly against the spirit, and he will not leave the kingdom of my soul in peace. But You, Who can command the power of the sea and calm the tumult of its waves,  arise and help me. Scatter the nat ions that delight in war; crush them in Your sight. Show forth I beg, Your wonderful works and let Your right hand be glorified, because for me there is no  other hope or refuge except in You, O Lord, my God.
