# BOOK FOUR: 

## Chapter 3: It Is Profitable To Receive Communion Often

THE DISCIPLE  
 
BEHOLD, I come to You, Lord, that I may prosper by Your gift and be delighted at Your holy banquet which Yo u, O God, in Your sweet ness have prepared for Your poor. Behold, all that I can or  ought to desire is in You. You are my salvation and my redemption, my hope and str ength, my honor and glory. 
Gladden, then, this day the soul of Your  servant because I have raised my heart to You, O Lord Jesus. I long to receive Y ou now, devoutly and reverently. I desire to bring You into my house that, with Zac heus, I may merit Your  blessing and be numbered among the children of Abraham. 
My soul longs for Your Body; my heart desires to be united with You. Give me Yourself -- it is enough; for without You there is no consolation. Without You I cannot exist, without Your visitation I cannot live. I must often come to  You, therefore, and receive the strength of my salvation lest, deprived of this heavenly f ood, I grow weak on the way. Once, most merciful Jesus, wh ile preaching to the people and healing their many ills, You said: "I will not  send them away fasting, le st they faint in the way."49 Deal with me likewise, You Who have left Yourself in this Sacrament for the consolation of the faithful. You are sweet refreshment to the soul, and he who eats You worthily will be a sharer in, and an heir to, eternal glory. 
It is indeed necessary for me, who fall and sin so often, who so quickly become lax and weak, to renew, cleanse, and in flame myself through frequent prayer, confession, and the holy reception of Your B ody, lest perhaps by abstaining too long, I fall away from my holy purpose. For from t he days of his youth the senses of man are prone to evil, and unless divine aid strengt hens him, he quickly falls deeper. But Holy Communion removes him from evil and confirms him in good. 
                                                 
49Matt. 15:32.

If I am so often careless and lax when I celebrate or communicate, what would happen if I did not receive this remedy and s eek so great a help? Although I am neither fit nor properly disposed to celebrate every day, yet I will do my bes t at proper times to receive the divine Mysteries and share in this great grace. This, indeed, is the one chief consolation of the faithful s oul when separated from You by mo rtality, that often mindful of her God, she receives her Be loved with devout  recollection. 
Oh, wonderful condescension of Your affe ction toward us, that You, the Lord God, Creator and Giver of life to all, should see fit to co me to a poor soul and to appease her hunger with all Your divinity and humanity! O happy mind and blessed soul which deserves to receive You, her Lord Go d, and in receiving You, is filled with spiritual joy! How great a Master she entertains, what a beloved guest she receives, how sweet a companion she welcomes, how tr ue a friend she gains, how beautiful and noble is the spouse she embraces, beloved and desired above all things that can be loved and desired! Let heaven and earth and all t heir treasures stand silent before Your face, most sweetly Beloved, for whatever  glory and beauty they have is of Your condescending bounty, and they cannot appr oach the beauty of Your name, Whose wisdom is untold.
