# BOOK TWO: 

## Chapter 9: Wanting No Share In Comfort

IT IS not hard to spurn human consolat ion when we have the divine. It is, however, a very great thing indeed to be abl e to live without either divine or human comforting and for the honor of God willingly to endure this ex ile of heart, not to seek oneself in anything, and to think nothing of one's own merit. 
Does it matter much, if at the coming of  grace, you are cheer ful and devout? This is an hour desired by all, for he whom the grace of God sustains travels easily enough. 
What wonder if he feel no burden when borne  up by the Almighty and led on by the Supreme Guide! For we are always glad to have something to comfort us, and only with difficulty does a man divest himself of self. 
The holy martyr, Lawrence, with his pr iest, conquered the world because he despised everything in it that  seemed pleasing to him, and fo r love of Christ patiently

suffered the great high priest of God, Sixtus, whom he lov ed dearly, to be taken from him. Thus, by his love for the Creator he overcame the love of man, and chose instead of human consolation the good pleas ure of God. So you, too, must learn to part with an intimate and much-needed friend for the love of God. Do not take it to heart when you are deserted by a friend, k nowing that in the end we mu st all be parted from one another. 
A man must fight long and bravely against himself before he learns to master himself fully and to direct all his affections  toward God. When he trusts in himself, he easily takes to human consolation. The tr ue lover of Christ, however, who sincerely pursues virtue, does not fall back upon consolati ons nor seek such pleasures of sense, but prefers severe trials and hard labors for the sake of Christ. 
When, therefore, spiritual consolation is given by God, receiv e it gratefully, but understand that it is His gift and not your me riting. Do not exult, do not be overjoyed, do not be presumptuous, but be the humbler for the gift, more  careful and wary in all your actions, for this hour will pass and temptation will come in its wake. 
When consolation is taken away, do not at once despair but wait humbly and patiently for the heavenly visit, since God can restore to you more abundant solace. 
This is neither new nor strange to one w ho knows God's ways, for such change of fortune often visited the great saints and prophets of old. Thus there was one who, when grace was with him, declared: "In my prosperity I said: 'I shall never be moved.'" 
But when grace was taken away, he adds what he experienced in himself: "Thou didst hide Thy face, and I was troubled." Meanwh ile he does not despair; rather he prays more earnestly to the Lord, saying: "T o Thee, O Lord, will I cry; and I will make supplication to my God." At length, he receives  the fruit of his prayer, and testifying that he was heard, says "The Lord hath heard, and hath had mercy on me: the Lord became my helper." And how was he helped? "Thou hast turned," he says, "my mourning into joy, and hast surrounded me with gladness."
14 If this is the case with great saints , we who are weak and poor ought not to despair because we are fervent at times and at other times cold, for the spirit comes and goes according to His will. Of this the bl essed Job declared: "Thou visitest him early in the morning, and Thou provest him suddenly."15 In what can I hope, then, or in whom ought I trust, save only in the great mercy of God and the hope of heavenly grace? For though I have with me good men, devout brethren, faithful friends, holy books, beautiful treatises, sweet songs and hymns, all these help and please but little when I am abandoned by grace and left to my poverty. 
At such times there is no better remedy t han patience and resignation of self to the will of God. 
I have never met a man so religious and de vout that he has not experienced at some time a withdrawal of grace and felt a lessening of  fervor. No saint was so sublimely rapt and enlightened as not to be tempted before and after. He, indeed, is not worthy of the sublime contem plation of God who has not been tried by some tribulation for the sake of God. For temptation is usua lly the sign preceding the consolation that is to follow, and heavenly consolation is promis ed to all those proved by temptation. "To 
                                                 
14Ps. 29:7-12. 
15Job 7:18.

him that overcometh," sa ys Christ, "I will give to eat of the Tree of Life."16 Divine consolation, then, is given in order to make a man braver in enduring adversity, and temptation follows in order that he ma y not pride himself on the good he has done. 
The devil does not sleep, nor is the fles h yet dead; therefore, you must never cease your preparation for battle, because on the right and on the left are enemies who never rest.
