# BOOK THREE:

## Chapter 50: How A Desolate Person Ought To Commit Himself Into The Hands Of

THE DISCIPLE

LORD God, Holy Father, may You be ble ssed now and in eternity. For as You will, so is it done; and what You do is good. Let Your servant rejoice in You -- not in himself or in any other, for You alone are true  joy. You are my hope and my crown. You, O Lord, are my joy and my honor.
What does Your servant possess that he has not received from You, and that without any merit of his own? Yours are all t he things which You have given, all the things which You have made.
I am poor and in labors since my youth,  and my soul is sorrowful sometimes even to the point of tears. At  times, also, my spirit is troubled because of impending sufferings. I long for the joy of  peace. Earnestly I beg for t he peace of Your children who are fed by You in the light of consolation. If You give peace,  if You infuse holy joy, the soul of Your servant shall be filled with holy song and be devout in praising You. But if You withdraw Yourself, as You so very ofte n do, he will not be able to follow the way of Your commandments, but will ra ther be obliged to strike his breast and bend the knee, because his today is different from yester day and the day before w hen Your light shone upon his head and he was protect ed in the shadow of Your wi ngs from the temptations rushing upon him.
Just Father, ever to be praised, the hour is come for Your servant to be tried.
Beloved Father, it is right that in this hour  Your servant should su ffer something for You.
O Father, forever to be honored, the hour which You knew from all eternity is at hand, when for a short time Your servant should be outwardly oppressed, but inwardly should ever live with You.
Let him be a little slighted, let him be humbled , let him fail in the sight of men, let him be afflicted with sufferings and pains, so that he may rise again with You in the dawn of the new light and be glorified in heaven.
Holy Father, You have so appointed and wished it. What has happened is what You commanded. For this is a favor to Your friend, to suffer and be troubled in the world for Your love, no matter how often and by  whom You permit it to happen to him.
Nothing happens in the world without Y our design and providence, and without cause. It is well for me, O Lord, that Y ou have humbled me, that I may learn the justice of Your judgments and cast away all pr esumption and haughtine ss of heart. It is profitable for me that shame has covered my face that I may look to You rather than to men for consolation. Hereby I have learned also to fear Your inscrutable judgment falling alike upon the just and unjust yet not without equity and justice.
Thanks to You that You have not spared me  evils but have bruised me with bitter blows, inflicting sorrows, sending distress without and within. Under heaven there is none to console me except You, my Lord G od, the heavenly Physician of souls, Who

wound and heal, Who cast down to hell and rais e up again. Your di scipline is upon me and Your very rod shall instruct me.
Behold, beloved Father, I am in Your hands. I bow myself under Your correcting chastisement. Strike my back and my neck, that I may bend my crookedness to Your will. Make of me a pious and humble follower,  as in Your goodness You are wont to do, that I may walk according to Your every nod. M yself and all that is mine I commit to You to be corrected, for it is better to be punished here than hereafter.
You know all things without exception,  and nothing in man's conscience is hidden from You. Coming events You know bef ore they happen, and there is no need for anyone to teach or admonish You of what is being done on earth. You know what will promote my progress, and how much tribulati on will serve to cleanse away the rust of vice. Deal with me according to Your good pl easure and do not despise my sinful life, which is known to none so well or so clearly as to You alone.
Grant me, O Lord, the grace to know what should be know n, to praise what is most pleasing to You, to esteem that whic h appears most precious to You, and to abhor what is unclean in Your sight.
Do not allow me to judge according to the light of my bodily eyes, nor to give sentence according to the hearing of ignorant  men's ears. But let me distinguish with true judgment between things visible and sp iritual, and always seek above all things Your good pleasure. The senses of men often err in their judgments, and the lovers of this world also err in loving only visible thin gs. How is a man the better for being thought greater by men? The deceiver deceives the deceitful, the vain man deceives the vain, the blind deceives the blind, the weak decei ves the weak as often as he extols them, and in truth his foolish praise shames them  the more. For, as the humble St. Francis says, whatever anyone is in Your  sight, that he is and nothing more.
