# BOOK THREE:

## Chapter 45: All Men Are Not To Be Believed , For It Is Easy To Err In Speech

THE DISCIPLE

GRANT me help in my needs, O Lord, for th e aid of man is useless. How often have I failed to find faithfulness in places where I thought I possessed it! And how many times I have found it where I least expected it! Vain, therefore, is hope in men, but the salvation of the just is in You, O God. Blessed be Your name, O Lord my God, in everything that befalls us.
We are weak and unstable, quickly decei ved and changed. Who is the man that is able to guard himself with such caution and care as not sometimes to fall into deception or perplexity? He who confides in  You, O Lord, and seeks You with a simple heart does not fall so easily. And if some trouble should come upon him, no matter how entangled in it he may be, he will be more qui ckly delivered and comforted by You. For You will not forsake him who trus ts in You to the very end.
Rare is the friend who remains faithful through all his friend's distress. But You, Lord, and You alone, are entirely faithful in all things; other than You, there is none so faithful.
Oh, how wise is that holy soul38 who said: "My mind is firmly settled and founded in Christ." If that were tr ue of me, human fear w ould not so easily cause me anxiety, nor would the darts of words distur b. But who can foresee all th ings and provide against all evils? And if things foreseen have often hurt, can those which are unlooked for do otherwise than wound us gravely? Why, indeed, have I not provided better for my wretched self? Why, too, have I so easily kept faith in others?  We are but men, however, nothing more than weak men, al though we are thought by many to be, and are called, angels.
In whom shall I put my faith, Lord? In  whom but You? You are the truth which does not deceive and cannot be deceived. Ever y man, on the other hand, is a liar, weak, unstable, and likely to err, especially in words, so that one  ought not to be too quick to believe even that which seems, on t he face of it, to sound true. How wise was Your warning to beware of men; that a man's enemies ar e those of his own household; that we should not believe if anyone says: "Behold he is here, or behold he is there."
I have been taught to my own cost, and I hope it has given me greater caution, not greater folly. "Bewar e," they say, "beware and keep to  yourself what I tell you!" Then while I keep silent, believing that the matte r is secret, he who asks me to be silent cannot remain silent himself, but immedi ately betrays both me and himself, and goes his way. From tales of this kind and from su ch careless men protect me, O Lord, lest I fall into their hands and into their ways. Put in my mouth words that are true and steadfast and keep far from me  the crafty tongue, because  what I am not willing to suffer I ought by all means to shun.
Oh, how good and how peaceful it is to be silent about others, not to believe without discrimination all that is  said, not easily to report it further, to reveal oneself to

38St. Agatha.

few, always to seek You as the discerner of hearts, and not to be blown away by every wind of words, but to wish that all thi ngs, within and beyond us, be done according to the pleasure of Thy will.
How conducive it is for the keeping of heav enly grace to fly the gaze of men, not to seek abroad things which seem to caus e admiration, but to  follow with utmost diligence those which give fervor and amend ment of life! How many have been harmed by having their virtue known and praised too has tily! And how truly profitable it has been when grace remained hidden during this frail lif e, which is all temptation and warfare!
