# BOOK FOUR:

## Chapter 4: Many Blessings Are Given Those Who Receive Communion Worthily

THE DISCIPLE

O LORD my God, favor Your servant with the blessings of Your sweetness that I may merit to approach Your magnificent Sa crament worthily and devoutly. Lift up my heart to You and take away from me this heavy indolence. Visit me with Your saving grace that I may in spirit taste Your sweet ness which lies hidden in this Sacrament like water in the depths of a spring. Enlighten my eyes to behold this great Mystery, and give me strength to believe in it with firm faith.
For it is Your work, not the power of man, Your sacred institution, not his invention. No man is able of himself to  comprehend and understand these things which surpass even the keen vision of angels. How, then, shall I, an unworthy sinner who am but dust and ashes, be able to fathom  and understand so great a mystery?
O Lord, I come to You at Your command in  simplicity of heart, in good, firm faith, with hope and reverence, and I truly believe that You ar e present here in this Sacrament, God and man. It is Your will that I receive You and unite myself to You in love. Wherefore, I beg Your mercy and ask t hat special grace be given me, that I may be wholly dissolved in You and filled with Yo ur love, no longer to concern myself with exterior consolations. For this, the highest and most worthy Sacrament, is the health of soul and body, the cure of ever y spiritual weakness. In it my defects are remedied, my passions restrained, and temptations overcome or allayed. In it greater grace is infused, growing virtue is nourished, faith confirmed,  hope strengthened, and charity fanned into flame.

You, my God, the protector of my soul , the strength of human weakness, and the giver of every interior consolation, have gi ven and still do often give in this Sacrament great gifts to Your loved ones who communi cate devoutly. Moreover, You give them many consolations amid their numerous tr oubles and lift them fr om the depths of dejection to the hope of Your protection. Wi th new graces You cheer and lighten them within, so that they who are full of anxie ty and without affection before Communion may find themselves changed for the better afte r partaking of this heavenly food and drink.
Likewise, You so deal with Your elect that they may truly acknowledge and plainly experience how weak they are in  themselves and what goodness and grace they obtain from You. For though in themselves they are cold, obdurate, and wanting in devotion, through You they becom e fervent, cheerful, and devout.
Who, indeed, can humbly approach the fountain of sweetness and not carry away a little of it? Or who, standing before a blazing fire does  not feel some of its heat?
You are a fountain always filled with superabundanc e! You are a fire, ever burning, that never fails!
Therefore, while I may not ex haust the fullness of  the fountain or drink to satiety, yet will I put my lips to the mout h of this heavenly stream that  from it I may receive at least some small drop to refresh my thirst a nd not wither away. And if I cannot as yet be all heavenly or as full of fire  as the cherubim and seraphim, yet I will try to become more devout and prepare my heart so t hat I may gather some small spark of divine fire from the humble reception of this life-giving Sacrament.
Whatever is wanting in me, good Jesus, Savior most holy, do You in Your kindness and grace supply for me, You Who have been pleased to call all unto You, saying: "Come to Me all you that l abor and are burdened and I will refresh you."
I, indeed, labor in the sweat of my brow . I am torn with sorrow of heart. I am laden with sin, troubled with temptations, enmeshed and oppresse d by many evil passions, and there is none to help me, none to deliver and save me but You, my Lord God and Savior, to Whom I entrust myself and all I have, that You may protect me and lead me to eternal life. Fo r the honor and glory of Your name receive me, You Who have prepared Your Body and Blood as food and drink for me. Grant, O Lord, my God and Savior, that by approaching Your Mysteries frequently, the zeal of my devotion may increase.
