# BOOK THREE: 

## Chapter 5: The Wonderful Effect Of Divine Love

THE DISCIPLE  
 
I BLESS You, O heavenly Father, Father of my Lord Jesus Christ, for having condescended to remember me, a poor creature. Thanks to Yo u, O Father of mercies, God of all consolation, Who with Your co mfort sometimes refresh me, who am not worthy of it. I bless You always and glor ify You with Your only -begotten Son and the Holy Spirit, the Paracl ete, forever and ever. 
Ah, Lord God, my holy Lover, when You come into my heart, all that is within me will rejoice. You are my glory and the ex ultation of my heart. You are my hope and refuge in the day of my tribulation. But bec ause my love is as yet weak and my virtue imperfect, I must be strengthened and comforted by You. Visit me often, therefore, and teach me Your holy discipline. Free me fr om evil passions and cleanse my heart of all disorderly affection so that, healed and purif ied within, I may be fi t to love, strong to suffer, and firm to persevere. 
Love is an excellent thing, a very great blessing, indeed.  It makes every difficulty easy, and bears all wrongs with equanimity . For it bears a burden without being weighted and renders sweet all that is bitter.  The noble love of Je sus spurs to great deeds and excites longing for that which is more perfect. Love tends upward; it will not be held down by anything low. Love wishes  to be free and estranged from all worldly affections, lest its inward sight be obstruc ted, lest it be entangled in any temporal interest and overcome by adversity. 
Nothing is sweeter than love, nothing stronger or higher or wider; nothing is more pleasant, nothing fuller, and nothing better in heaven or on earth, for love is born of God and cannot rest except in God, Who is above all created things. 
One who is in love flies, runs, and rejoic es; he is free, not bound.  He gives all for all and possesses all in all, because he rest s in the one sovereign Good, Who is above all things, and from Whom ev ery good flows and proceeds. He does not look to the gift but turns himself above all gifts to the Giver. 
Love often knows no limits but overflow s all bounds. Love feels no burden, thinks nothing of troubles, attempts more than it is able, and does not plead impossibility, because it believes that it may and can do all thi ngs. For this reason, it is able to do all, performing and effecting much where he who does not love fails and falls. 
Love is watchful. Sleeping, it does not slum ber. Wearied, it is not tired. Pressed, it is not straitened. Alarmed, it is not confus ed, but like a living flame, a burning torch, it forces its way upward and passes unharmed through every obstacle. 
If a man loves, he will know the sound of th is voice. For this warm affection of soul is a loud voice crying in the ears of God,  and it says: "My God, my love, You are all

mine and I am all Yours. Give me an increase of love, that I may learn to taste with the inward lips of my heart how sweet it is to  love, how sweet to be dissolved in love and bathe in it. Let me be rapt in love. Let me ri se above self in great fervor and wonder. Let me sing the hymn of love, and let me follow Y ou, my Love, to the heights. Let my soul exhaust itself in praising You,  rejoicing out of love. Let me  love You more than myself, and let me not love myself except for Your sa ke. In You let me love all those who truly love You, as the law of love, whic h shines forth from You, commands." 
Love is swift, sincere, kind, pleasant, and delightful. Love is strong, patient and faithful, prudent, long-suffering, and manly. Love is never self-seeking, for in whatever a person seeks himself there he falls from love . Love is circumspect, humble, and upright. 
It is neither soft nor light, nor intent upon va in things. It is sober and chaste, firm and quiet, guarded in all the senses. Love is subject and obedient to superiors. It is mean and contemptible in its own eyes, devoted and thankful to God; always trusting and hoping in Him even when He is distasteful to it, for there is no living in love without sorrow. He who is not ready to suffer all things and to stand resigned to the will of the Beloved is not worthy to be called a lover. A lover must embrace willingly all that is difficult and bitter fo r the sake of the Beloved, and he should not turn away from Him because of adversities.
