# BOOK THREE: 

## Chapter 22: Remember The Innumerable Gifts Of God

THE DISCIPLE  
 
OPEN my heart, O Lord, to Y our law and teach me to walk in the way of Your commandments. Let me understand Y our will. Let me remember Your blessings -- all of them and each single one of them -- with great reverence and care so that henceforth I may return worthy thanks for them. I know that I am unabl e to give due thanks for even the least of Your gifts. I am unworthy of  the benefits You have given me, and when I consider Your generosity my spirit faints away  before its greatness. All that we have of soul and body, whatever we possess interiorly or exteriorly, by nature or by grace, are Your gifts and they proclaim Your goodness and mercy from which we have received all good things.

If one receives more and another less, ye t all are Yours and without You nothing can be received. He who receives greater th ings cannot glory in his own merit or consider himself above others or behave insol ently toward those who receive less. He who attributes less to himself and is the mo re humble and devout in returning thanks is indeed the greater and the better, while he who considers himself lower than all men and judges himself to be the least worthy, is t he more fit to receive the greater blessing. 
He, on the other hand, who has received fewer gifts should not be sad or impatient or envious of the ri cher man. Instead he should turn his mind to You and offer You the greatest praise because You give so bountifully, so freely and  willingly, without regard to persons. All things come from You;  therefore, You are to be praised in all things. You know what is good for each of us; and why one should receive less and another more is not for us to judge, but for You Who have marked every man's merits. 
Therefore, O Lord God, I consider it a great blessing not to have many things which human judgment holds praiseworthy and glorious, for one who realizes his own poverty and vileness should not be sad or downc ast at it, but rather consoled and happy because You, O God, have chosen the poor, t he humble, and the despised in this world to be Your friends and servants. The truth of this is witnessed by Your Apostles, whom You made princes over all the world. Yet they  lived in this world without complaining, so humble and simple, so free from  malice and deceit, that they we re happy even to suffer reproach for Your name and to embrace with great affection that which the world abhors. 
A man who loves You and recognizes Y our benefits, therefore, should be gladdened by nothing so much as by Your will,  by the good pleasure of Your eternal decree. With this he should be so contented and consoled that he w ould wish to be the least as others wish to be the gr eatest; that he would be as pe aceful and satisfied in the last place as in the first, and as willing to be despised, unknown and forgotten, as to be honored by others and to have more fame than they. He should prefer Your will and the love of Your honor to all else, and it should comfort him more than all the benefits which have been, or will be, given him.
