# BOOK ONE: 

## Chapter 25: Zeal In Amending Our Lives

BE WATCHFUL and diligent in God's servic e and often think of why you left the world and came here. Was it not that you might live fo r God and become a spiritual man? Strive earnestly for perfection, then, be cause in a short time you will receive the reward of your labor, and neither fear nor so rrow shall come upon you at the hour of death. 
Labor a little now, and soon you shall find great rest, in truth, et ernal joy; for if you continue faithful and diligent in doing, God will undoubtedly be faithful and generous in rewarding. Continue to have reasonable hope of gaining salvation, but do not act as though you were certain of it le st you grow in dolent and proud. 
One day when a certain man who wavered often and anxiously between hope and fear was struck with sadness, he knelt in humble prayer before the altar of a church. While meditating on these things, he said: "Oh if I but knew whether I should persevere to the end!" Instant ly he heard within the divine answer: "If you knew this, what would you do? Do now what you w ould do then and you will be quite secure." 
Immediately consoled and comforted, he re signed himself to the divine will and the anxious uncertainty ceased. His curiosity no l onger sought to know what the future held for him, and he tried instead to find the perfe ct, the acceptable will of God in the beginning and end of every good work. 
"Trust thou in the Lord and do good," sa ys the Prophet; "dwell in the land and thou shalt feed on its riches."7 There is one thing that keeps many from zealously improving their lives, that is, dread of the difficulty, the toil of battle. Certainly they who try bravely to overcome the most difficult and unpleasant obstacles far outstr ip others in the purs uit of virtue. A man makes the most progress and merits the most grace precisely in those matters wherein he gains the greatest victories over self and most mortifie s his will. True, each one has his own difficulties to meet and conquer, but a diligent and sincere man will make greater progress even though he have more passions than one who is more even- tempered but less concerned about virtue. 
Two things particularly further improvement  -- to withdraw oneself forcibly from those vices to which nature is viciously inclined, and to work fervently for those graces which are most needed. 
Study also to guard against and to overcome the faults which in others very frequently displease you. Make the best of ev ery opportunity, so that if you see or hear good example you may be moved to imitate it. On the other hand, take care lest you be guilty of those things which you consider r eprehensible, or if you have ever been guilty of them, try to correct yourself as soon as possible. As you see others, so they see you. 
How pleasant and sweet to behold bret hren fervent and devout, well mannered and disciplined! How sad and painful to s ee them wandering in dissolution, not practicing the things to which they are called! How hurtful it is to neglect the purpose of their vocation and to attend to what is not their business! 
                                                 
7Ps. 36:3.

Remember the purpose you have undertaken,  and keep in mind the image of the Crucified. Even though you ma y have walked for many year s on the pathway to God, you may well be ashamed if, with the image of Christ before y ou, you do not try to make yourself still more like Him. 
The religious who concerns himself in tently and devoutly with our Lord's most holy life and passion will find t here an abundance of all things useful and necessary for him. He need not seek for anything better than Jesus. 
If the Crucified should come to our hearts, how quickly and abundantly we would learn! 
A fervent religious accepts all the thi ngs that are commanded him and does them well, but a negligent and lukewarm religious  has trial upon trial, and suffers anguish from every side because he has no consolation within and is forbidden to seek it from without. The religious who does not live up to hi s rule exposes himself to dreadful ruin, and he who wishes to be more free and untrammeled will always be in trouble, for something or other will always displease him. 
How do so many other religious who are confined in cloistered discipline get along? They seldom go out, they live in contem plation, their food is poor, their clothing coarse, they work hard, they speak but littl e, keep long vigils, rise early, pray much, read frequently, and subject themselves to a ll sorts of discipline. Think of the Carthusians and the Cistercians, the monks and nuns of different orders, how every night they rise to sing praise to the Lord. It would be a shame if you should grow lazy in such holy service when so many religious  have already begun to rejoice in God. 
If there were nothing else to do but prai se the Lord God with all your heart and voice, if you had never to eat, or drink, or sleep, but could praise God always and occupy yourself solely with spiritual pursu its, how much happier you would be than you are now, a slave to every necessity of t he body! Would that there were no such needs, but only the spiritual refreshment s of the soul which, sad to  say, we taste too seldom! 
When a man reaches a point where he see ks no solace from any creature, then he begins to relish God perfectly. Then al so he will be content no matter what may happen to him. He will neither rejoice over gr eat things nor grieve over small ones, but will place himself entirely and confidently in the hands of God, Who for him is all in all, to Whom nothing ever perishes or dies, for Whom  all things live, and Whom they serve as He desires. 
Always remember your end and do not forget  that lost time never returns. 
Without care and diligence you will never acquire virtue. When you begin to grow lukewarm, you are falling into the beginning of ev il; but if you give yourself to fervor, you will find peace and will experience less hardshi p because of God's grace and the love of virtue. 
A fervent and diligent man is ready for all th ings. It is greater work to resist vices and passions than to sweat in physical toil. He who does not overcome small faults, shall fall little by little into greater ones. 
If you have spent the day pr ofitably, you will always be happy at eventide. Watch over yourself, arouse yourself, warn your self, and regardless of what becomes of others, do not neglect yourself. The more violence you do to yourself, the more progress you will make.
