# BOOK TWO:

## Chapter 11: Few Love The Cross Of Jesus

JESUS has always many who love His heavenly kingdom, but few who bear His cross. He has many who desire consolation, but  few who care for trial. He finds many to share His table, but few to take part in His  fasting. All desire to be happy with Him; few wish to suffer anything for Him. Many follow Him  to the breaking of bread, but few to the drinking of the chalice of His passion. M any revere His miracles; few approach the shame of the Cross. Many love Him as lo ng as they encounter no hardship; many praise and bless Him as long as they receive some comfort from Him. But if Jesus hides Himself and leaves them for a while, they fall either into complaints or into deep dejection. Those, on the contrary, who lo ve Him for His own sake and not for any comfort of their own, bless Him  in all trial and anguish of heart as well as in the bliss of consolation. Even if He should never give t hem consolation, yet they would continue to praise Him and wish always to give Him thanks.  What power there is in pure love for Jesus -- love that is flee from all self-interest and self-love!
Do not those who always seek consolation deserve to be called mercenaries? Do not those who always think of their own profit  and gain prove that they love themselves rather than Christ? Where c an a man be found who desires to serve God for nothing?
Rarely indeed is a man so spiritual as to st rip himself of all things. And who shall find a man so truly poor in spirit as to be free fr om every creature? His value is like that of things brought from th e most distant lands.
If a man give all his wealth, it is nothing; if he do great penance, it is little; if he gain all knowledge, he is still far afield ; if he have great virtue and much ardent devotion, he still lacks a great deal, and especially,  the one thing that is most necessary to him. What is this one thing? That leaving all, he forsake himself, completely renounce himself, and give up all private affections . Then, when he has done all that he knows ought to be done, let him consider it as not hing, let him make li ttle of what may be considered great; let him in all honesty call himself an unprofitable servant. For truth itself has said: "When you shall have done all these things t hat are commanded you, say: 'we are unprofitable servants.'"17

17Luke 17:10.

Then he will be truly poor and stripped in sp irit, and with the pro phet may say: "I am alone and poor."18 No one, however, is more wealth y than such a man; no one is more powerful, no one freer than he who knows how to leave all things and think of himself as the least of all.
