# BOOK FOUR: 

## Chapter 7: The Examination Of Conscience And The Resolution To Amend

THE VOICE OF CHRIST  
 
ABOVE all, God's priest should approach the celebration and reception of this Sacrament with the deepest humil ity of heart and suppliant re verence, with complete faith and the pious intenti on of giving honor to God. 
Carefully examine your conscience, then. Cleanse and purify it to the best of your power by true contrition and humble confession,  that you may have no burden, know of no remorse, and thus be free to come near. Let t he memory of all your sins grieve you, and especially lament and bewail your daily  transgressions. Then if time permits, confess to God in the secret  depths of your heart all the miseries your passions have caused. 
Lament and grieve because you are still so worldly, so carnal, so passionate and unmortified, so full of roving lust, so carele ss in guarding the external senses, so often occupied in many vain fancies, so inclined to exterior things and so heedless of what lies within, so prone to laughter and dissipa tion and so indisposed to sorrow and tears, so inclined to ease and the pleasures of the flesh and so cool to austerity and zeal, so curious to hear what is new and to see the beautiful and so slow to embrace humiliation and dejection, so covetous of abundance, so niggardly in giving and so tenacious in keeping, so inconsiderate in speech, so reluctant in silence, so undisciplined in character, so disordered in action, so greedy at meals, so deaf to the Word of God, so prompt to rest and so slow to labor, so awake to empt y conversation, so sleepy in keeping sacred vigils and so eager to end them , so wandering in your attention, so careless in saying the office, so lukewarm in celebrating, so heartless in receiving, so quickly distracted, so seldom fully recollected,  so quickly moved to anger, so apt to take offense at others, so prone to  judge, so severe in condemning, so happy in prosperity and so weak in adversity, so often making good resolutions and carrying so few of them into action. 
When you have confessed and deplored these and other faults with sorrow and great displeasure because of your weakness, be firmly determined  to amend your life day by day and to advance in goodness. Then,  with complete resignation and with your entire will offer yourself upon the altar of yo ur heart as an everlasting sacrifice to the honor of My name, by entrusti ng with faith both body and soul to My care, that thus you may be considered worthy to draw near and o ffer sacrifice to God and profitably receive the Sacrament of My Body. For there is no mo re worthy offering, no greater satisfaction for washing away sin than to offer yourself pur ely and entirely to God with the offering of the Body of Christ in Mass and Communion. 
If a man does what he can and is truly penitent, however often he comes to Me for grace and pardon, "As I live, saith the Lor d God, I desire not th e death of the wicked, but that the wicked turn from his way and live";50 I will no longer remember his sins, but all will be forgiven him. 
                                                 
50Ezek. 33:11.
