# Foreword

IN PREPARING this edition of The Imitation of Christ , the aim was to achieve a simple, readable text which would ring true to  those who are already lovers of this incomparable book and would attract others to  it. For this reason we have attempted to render the text into English as it is spoken today rather than the cloudy, archaic terminology that encumbers so m any translations of Christian classics. The result, we feel, has achieved a directness and conciseness which will meet the approval of modern readers. In the second place, we have made use of the familiar paragraph form, doing away with the simple statement or ve rse form of the original and of many translations. This was done in the interest of  easier reading, and in  order to bring out more clearly the connection bet ween the single statements.
No claim of literary excellenc e over the many English vers ions now extant is here advanced, nor any attempt to solve in furt her confusion the probl em of the book's authorship.
Theories most popular at the moment ascribe the Imitation to two or three men, members of the Brethren of t he Common Life, an association of priests organized in the Netherlands in the latter hal f of the fourteenth century. That Thomas Hemerken of Kempen, or Thomas À Kempis as he is now k nown, later translated a composite of their writings, essentially a spiritual diary, from the original Netherlandish into Latin is generally admitted by scholars. This T homas, born about the ye ar 1380, was educated by the Brethren of the Comm on Life, was moved to join  their community, and was ordained priest. His career thereafter was devoted to practicing the counsels of spiritual perfection and to copying books for the schools. From both pursuits evolved The Imitation of Christ . As editor and translator he was not without faults, but thanks to him the Imitation  became and has remained, after the Bi ble, the most widely read book in the world. It is his edition that is here r endered into English, withou t deletion of chapters or parts of them because doubts exist as to  their authorship, or because of variants in style, or for any of  the other more or  less valid reasons.
There is but one major change. The tr eatise on Holy Communion, which À Kempis places as Book Three, is here titl ed Book Four.  The move makes the order of the whole more logical and agrees with the thought of most editors.

THE TRANSLATORS Aloysius Croft Harold Bolton
